You know, when you send a text message from your phone, it's really easy to just divide
that whole process into two neat little boxes.
Oh, completely.
Hardware and software.
Right.
You have the hardware, which is, you know, the glass screen, the microchips, the battery.
Yeah.
And then you have the software.
Like the actual message you're trying to convey, the emojis, the meaning.
Yeah.
It feels very clean, very separate.
Exactly.
But then when you look at human beings and you look at how we actually communicate with
one another, that neat little division just totally falls apart.
We're looking at this biological landscape that is just incredibly intricate, where the software
of your thoughts is physically bound to the hardware of your neurons.
So welcome to the deep dive.
Glad to be here.
Today we're doing a deep dive into the lecture materials for you on language and communication
online.
And we're going to tear down that division between hardware and software to see how your
brain actually wires human connection.
Yeah.
We are getting right under the hood today.
When we define language, which the slides define as our spoken, written or signed words,
and the ways we combine them to communicate, meaning we run into this massive structural
question almost immediately.
Right.
The bottom up versus top down debate.
Exactly.
Is language just a bottom up reflex?
Like if sensory input comes in, does the brain just automatically kick out a response,
like a knee jerk reaction or, you know, does it require a top down blueprint of thought to
even function?
And the data is pretty clear on this, right?
Oh, entirely.
Yeah.
The data points entirely to the latter, language is a top down thought driven process, comprehension
pairs that raw bottom up sensory input, like the physical act of your eyes tracking text
on a screen or your ears catching sound waves, it pairs that with top down general knowledge
memory reasoning.
Your brain is basically like actively predicting reality based on what you already know.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Which that brings up one of the most fascinating debates in linguistics that your notes
cover.
If language requires all this top down structuring, does the language we speak actually
do the limits of our reality?
Ah, yeah, the determinism versus relativism debate, it's a big one.
It is.
There's this intense debate between linguistic determinism and linguistic relativism.
Right.
So linguistic determinism is the extreme end of the spectrum.
It's this really rigid hypothesis that language outright determines the way we think.
Like you've physically boxes you in.
Under this theory, if your native language doesn't have a word for a specific concept, say
a specific shade of blue or a complex concept like fairness, you literally lack the cognitive
hardware to perceive or even think about that concept.
So under determinism, language is just this inescapable cage, but then you have linguistic
relativism, which honestly feels a lot more aligned with how humans actually operate.
Yeah, most researchers lean toward relativism.
Right.
Because it's the idea that language merely influences or shapes the way we think without
trapping us.
And there's a great example of this in the lecture about how different languages handle
time.
Oh, the future tense studies.
Yeah.
So if your language requires you to speak about the future as if it's a completely separate
distant reality, you might structurally view the future as, you know, less urgent.
But if your language treats the present and the future with the exact same phrasing,
the future feels like today.
Which actually influences real world behaviors, right?
Like how much money people save for retirement?
Exactly.
It's wild.
It is wild.
And that behavioral shift perfectly captures relativism.
The language influences that top down reasoning process, but it doesn't hard code it.
And we can actually see this division of labor between language and general reasoning when
we look at the brain's anatomy.
Oh, the FMR-I scans?
Yeah, the research provides these incredible FMR-I scans in your slides.
And when you actually look at these scans, what jumps out immediately is how the brain
Yeah, those FMR-I bold signals are just amazing.
And bold, just as a quick reminder, stands for blood oxygen level dependent.
So we are literally watching where the blood flows to fuel neural activity.
Right.
Tracing the fuel line essentially.
Exactly.
And, you know, if you look at the diagram on this slide, you can see specific networks
highlighted.
The language system in purple, the multiple demand network in light green, the theory
of mind network in mid green, and the default mode network in dark green.
And what those bold signals reveal is just an astonishing level of specialization.
The brain's language areas, those regions highlighted in purple, they are essentially purists.
Purists.
What do you mean by that?
I mean, they only care about linguistic stimuli.
They respond strongly to random, unconnected sentences.
They respond to complex, meaningful sentences.
But they completely ignore meaningful pictures or videos.
And crucially, they do not process mathematics.
Wait, hold on.
Let me push back on that for a second.
Let's blur the lines a bit.
What if I read a math problem, but it's written out as a full English sentence?
Okay.
Like a word problem.
Yeah, something like subtract three from 601, then add two.
What happens in the brain then?
Because I mean, it's technically a sentence, which you just said, the purple network loves.
but it is fundamentally math, which it ignores.
So which processor actually takes over?
That's a brilliant distinction because it forces the brain to basically hand off the data.
Like a relay race.
Exactly like a relay race.
If you give the brain that written math problem, the purple language network acts purely
as a data entry clerk.
It decodes the raw words.
But the moment the brain realizes it needs to perform a calculation, the multiple demand
network, that light green area on your scan, it activates intensely to actually do the
mathematical reasoning.
Oh, wow.
So the light green network handles all the cognitive heavy lifting of the math.
Yeah.
Regardless of whether it's written as a paragraph or presented as an numerical equation,
like 601 minus three plus two.
So the purple network is essentially just parsing the text and then passing the payload
over to the light green network to do the actual computing.
Right.
And that handoff system extends to social processing too.
Oh, like the theory of mind network.
Exactly.
I read a sentence about someone's mental state, for instance.
She believed the ice cream was hidden in the fridge, but he wanted to eat it.
The purple network porses the grammar, but the theory of mind network, which is that mid green
area, it takes over to process the actual beliefs, desires and intentions of the characters.
That makes so much sense.
And if you're reading a long connected narrative, the default mode network in dark green
lights up to track the overarching story.
The systems of knowledge and reasoning, they respond to the concept regardless of how the
language actually delivers it.
And what's just wild to me is that these networks have incredibly precise anatomical
locations with almost zero overlap.
Like your brain doesn't just have one big soup of processing power.
It has distinct real estate for language syntax, mathematical logic, empathy and narrative.
It's highly compartmentalized.
It is.
But you know, all of this processing power implies that the signal actually made it into
the brain in the first place.
Visually the speech chain graphic in your notes lays this out perfectly.
If you look at that diagram, you see two heads facing each other in profile and notice
how the process forms a continuous loop from speaker to listener.
Exactly.
It starts in the speaker's brain, travels down motor nerves to the mouth, physically turns
into sound waves crossing the air, hits the listener's ear and travels up sensory nerves
back into the listener's brain.
Yeah, the speech chain really reminds us that communication is both a physical acoustic
event in the real world and an electrical event in the body.
So it's crossing from acoustic to electrical.
Right.
The physical structures of your, you know, the eardrum, the little bones, the cochlea,
they are mechanical.
They physically catch the sound waves.
But the ear is essentially just a very sophisticated microphone.
It translates those mechanical vibrations into electrical signals, which then travel up
the auditory nerve into the central auditory nervous system.
So the ear captures the data, but only the brain actually perceives the sound.
Exactly.
Which, um, that opens the door to a very specific kind of glitch.
If the ear is just the microphone, what happens when the microphone is perfectly flawless,
but the sound card in the computer is completely bottlenecked.
Oh man.
You were describing the exact mechanism of APD.
Auditory processing disorder.
Yes.
And this condition is frequently misunderstood as a traditional hearing impairment,
but it is not a loss of volume.
In APD, the physical hardware of the ear is completely healthy.
Like they could hear a pin drop.
Exactly.
They can hear a pin drop perfectly.
The deficit lies entirely in the central auditory nervous system's ability to
organize and decode those electrical signals.
Okay.
So it's like having a lightning fast internet connection.
But the router is overwhelmed.
Like the data packets are arriving, but the brain is just dropping them or scrambling
the order.
That is the perfect analogy.
The brain struggles to separate speech from background noise or, you know, it jumbles
the temporal sequence of sounds.
It's a processing bottleneck purely on the software interpretation side, not a mechanical failure
of the sensory organ itself.
So assuming the auditory signal successfully navigates that central nervous system router
without dropping any packets, where does it go to actually be understood?
Well, the brain has specific centers for that.
Right.
And incredibly detailed anatomical map for this.
Notice how incoming speech is first processed in the top temporal area called Wernickie's
area and for the record that's pronounced V-E-R-N-E-Q.
After processing there, the signal shoots across a neural cable called the Arculate
Faciculus, landing in the lower frontal area, Rocha's area pronounced B-R-O-Q for speech
planning.
Right.
And to stick with our computational analogy from earlier, Wernickie's area V-R-N-E-Q
is the semantic code.
It's where meaning is accessed and attached towards.
It's basically the dictionary.
Essentially, yeah.
It is fundamentally responsible for the comprehension of written and spoken language.
So if Wernickie's area is the software handling meaning, what actually happens when that
specific software crashes?
We see a condition called receptive aphasia and it's fascinating because the physical motor
hardware of the mouth and the grammatical processors, they're perfectly fine.
So the person retains completely fluent speech.
Like they sound totally normal.
The rhythm, the intonation, the pacing it all sounds entirely normal.
But because the comprehension center, Wernickie's area is damaged, the words they select
have no semantic anchor.
Oh wow.
Yeah.
They produce this fluent, effortless word salad.
And honestly, the most tragic element of this condition is that because their comprehension
is brick-in, they are usually entirely unaware that what they are saying makes absolutely
no sense to anyone else.
Man, that's wild.
We actually need to look at a real world clinical example to truly grasp how surreal this
disconnect is.
As you watch, notice how relaxed and confident he is as he speaks.
Yeah, watching his demeanor is just it's the key to understanding the mechanism of Wernickie's
aphasia.
He didn't seem stressed at all.
Not at all.
He speaks without a fraction of hesitation.
His articulation is perfectly smooth.
He clearly believes he is answering the interviewer's questions appropriately.
But the output is just a stream of disconnected jargon.
Exactly.
The motor mechanics are running flawlessly, but the code supplying the meaning has just
been wiped.
It is deeply unsettling because, you know, all the social cues of a normal conversation
are present, but the data payload is just gone.
Right.
Now, let's look at what happens when the software is intact, but the processing
hardware breaks.
Yeah.
So the signal travels from Wernickie's down the archivist's to the lower frontal area.
Broca's area.
Right.
B-O-Q.
Broca's area is the syntax processor.
If Wernickie provides the nouns and verbs, like the raw meaning, Broca's area handles
the grammatical structure and the physical planning of the speech movements required
to actually say them out loud.
It's the architect.
Exactly.
It's the architect assembling the structural framework of a sentence.
Okay.
So if Wernickie's crashes and leaves you with fluent nonsense, damage to Broca's area must
do the exact opposite, right?
Like, it shatters the fluency while leaving the underlying meaning completely trapped
inside.
That is exactly it.
That's the mechanism of non-fluent aphasia.
When Broca's area is damaged, spontaneous speech output is severely diminished.
And the reason for this goes right back to our hardware versus software division.
Because it's missing the structural tools.
Yes.
Small structural linking words, things like prepositions, conjunctions like and or but.
These are grammatical tools, not semantic concepts.
Because Broca's area processes grammar, those structural tools just vanish.
The patient can often access the nouns and verbs from Wernickie's area.
But they have absolutely no grammatical glue to hold them together.
That sounds incredibly frustrating.
And before we see this in a patient, there is an animation on slide 23 that actually visualizes
this mechanical process.
Image 29.giff, just a quick note for you.
The specific learning purpose of this animation needs to be described more fully by your
instructor before your final study materials are complete.
But visually, it clearly highlights the mechanical structural role that Broca's area plays
in assembling language into a sequence.
And when that processor is damaged, the execution is just agonizing.
As you watch, notice the physical effort it takes just to output a single concept.
The latency there is just heartbreaking.
It really is.
The pressure he seemed to be under was intense.
Yeah, because unlike Wernickie's aphasia, a patient with Broca's aphasia is painfully aware
of their deficit.
Their comprehension is entirely intact.
They know exactly what they want to say, but the hardware required to structure and execute
the words is shattered.
But the words they do say make sense.
Yes, that's the key.
Despite that agonizing lack of grammar and the immense physical pressure they are under,
the isolated words they manage to force out are highly accurate and contextually correct.
The semantic software is working perfectly.
It really emphasizes how fragile this entire system is.
I mean, we've covered the comprehension crashing and the grammatical process are breaking.
Yeah.
But your notes detail one more condition and honestly, it might be the most counterintuitive
neurological phenomenon out there.
Oh, you mean for an accent syndrome?
Yes.
FAS.
It is extraordinarily rare and it completely alters how the world perceives the patient.
It really does.
It's fascinating.
So FAS is a condition where a person suffers a neurological event like a stroke and suddenly
they wake up speaking with a highly noticeable foreign accent.
And if you look at the diagram on this final slide, you see a brain connectivity map showing
specific lesion networks damaged areas pointing directly toward the human vocal tract,
which implies this is a purely physical mechanism, right?
Not a cognitive one.
Exactly.
And we really have to dismantle a massive misconception here.
Yeah.
Definitely clear this up.
When someone wakes up with foreign accent syndrome, they have not miraculously absorbed
a new dialect while unconscious.
They didn't like download a French or regional British language pack into their brain overnight.
The underlying software of their native language hasn't changed at all.
So how does an American suddenly sound authentically British or French without actually learning
the accent?
Like what is the actual mechanism happening there?
So the lesions map directly to the highly specific motor functions in the primary motor
cortex that dictate exactly how the vocal tract physically executes sounds.
Okay.
So it's a hardware issue again.
We're hardware.
We are talking about microscopic millisecond level alterations in the timing of the vocal
chords, the exact placement of the tongue against the teeth, the subtle shaping of the
lips.
Just tiny misfires.
Yes.
It is a mechanical timing glitch in the output driver.
The patient is trying to speak their native language normally, but this timing error shifts
the phonetics just enough that the listener's brain categorizes the resulting rhythm
in vowel sounds as a known foreign accent.
That is absolutely wild.
So the accent doesn't actually exist in the speaker's brain.
Not at all.
The speaker just has a timing glitch.
Is the listener's brain that cures the glitch, tries to make sense to the pattern and labels
at French?
Exactly.
It's a perception issue on the receiving end.
can actually be.
Having it in action really drives home just how unfathomably precise the primary motor
cortex must be to articulate normal everyday speech.
It's incredible.
Just a fraction of a millimeter of neurological disruption, a microsecond of delayed timing
in the tongue and your entire outward presentation to the world is transformed.
It completely strips away any illusion that speaking is just a simple singular action.
Every single time we open our mouths this massive, deeply complex network of hardware
and software has to fire an absolute perfect sequence.
It really is a symphony of biological machinery.
It is.
And synthesizing all of this from linguistic relativism all the way down to the microscopic
timing of the vocal cords, it forces us to confront a pretty profound question.
Oh, I like where this is going.
As you review these notes on Broca's area, Verneke's area, and motor cortex lesions,
I want you to consider this.
If a tiny lesion in a specific fold of your brain can entirely strip away the structural
glue of your sentences, or if a microscopic shift in motor timing can suddenly give you
a foreign accent, all while leaving your underlying intellect, your memories and your actual
thoughts completely intact, what does that tell us about our sense of self?
That's a heavy question.
How much of our identity, our personality and the way the world actually perceives us is
just a fragile illusion built on top of very vulnerable neurological wiring.
Yeah.
It really makes you realize that the mind isn't just floating in the cloud, you know, it
is deeply, physically tethered to the machine.
Keep that fragile machinery in mind, the next time you strike up a conversation.
Thanks for diving deep with us today.